!Introduction!

A favorite (now cancelled) TV show of mine, /Firefly/, is a break from
the usual TV SF fare.  Rather than being members of the military or
intrepid explorers, the main characters in the show are crewmembers of
a small transport ship, /Serenity/; and instead of saving the Galaxy
or discovering strange new worlds, they're just trying to make a
living -- honest or otherwise.

That got me to wondering how feasible it would be for someone to make
an honest living in the /Universe/ universe as a ship owner.  I
decided to do a few cost analyses to see what kind of revenue and
expenses there would be, and if the profit could justify the
undertaking.

I made a few basic assumptions:

  1. The voyages I would consider would be from one starport to
     another, one way.  I would not take the energy expenditure of
     ship takeoffs into account.  (Things would be complicated enough
     as they were!)

  2. There would be no shortage of passengers or cargo.  All berths
     would be filled, every ton of cargo capacity used.  (Later on I
     would consider things like the minimum number of passengers
     needed to break even.)

  3. Energy is list price; it's not abundant or scarce anywhere.

  4. Ships would accelerate at 1 G unless they needed to go slower for
     econimic reasons.


!Trade goods!

  Prices of anything in /Universe/ that costs more than 1 Tran (1 T)
  -- in other words, anything interesting -- are all affected by the
  /Actual Price Table/.  This table adjusts the prices of goods and
  materials semi-randomly, between 50% and 200% of their listed
  price.  The die roll that determines price is affected by whether
  the item is manufactured on-planet or imported, whether it's
  exported to other planets, whether it's higher-tech than the
  planet's current technological base, and whether or not it's legal.
  On average, prices work out like this:

      Exported item      77%
      Normal		106%
      Imported item	144%
      +1 Civ Level	165%
      +2 Civ Levels    1060%

  (Raw materials, like bulk aluminum or silicon, are affected
  similarly.  Substitute "abundant" for "exported", "not found on
  world" for "imported", and ignore Civ Level adjustments.)

  Illegal items -- which includes military-issue weapons, restricted
  items without a permit, and anything more than two Civ Levels above
  the prevailing tech -- have their price multiplied by 10 times the
  Law Level of the world, in addition to the adjustments above.

  Now, obviously the greatest profit to be had is in high-tech goods
  manufactured off-planet.  CL8 body armor, for example, runs an
  average of 35 T on a planet with iron and abundant gold, but sells
  for 487 T on a CL6 planet, and even more on a lower tech planet.
  Compare that to 66 T on a high-tech planet that just doesn't happen
  to have abundant gold.

  A greater profit might be had in items that are illegal for their
  own sake, like military weapons.  But the Actual Price Table affects
  buying and selling both, so unless the ship owner has a special
  supplier willing to sell at less than the standard illegal-item
  price, the profit is diminished (and the risks increased).

  Raw materials fetch much less of a profit.  The most expensive
  material is magnetic monopoles, at 2 T per gram.  However, it's only
  available at single sites (per the World Resource Table), and so
  only one gram of ore is mined at a time (see the Mining skill
  description).  The most valuable bulk commodities are gold and
  platinum: each fetches 1 T per gram, but the right mine can produce
  kilograms of gold ore.  Most other materials are priced in trans per
  metric ton; the most valuable of these is cesium at 50 T/ton.  This
  is far below the price of manufactured goods.  CL8 body armor weighs
  16 kg per unit; even with packaging, that's at least 30 units per
  ton, or a list price of 1,380 T/ton!

  So we can draw three conclusions from this:

  1. Manufactured goods are far more profitable than raw materials.

  2. Illegal goods are far more profitable than legal ones.

  3. Very illegal goods -- i.e., weapons -- are the most profitable of
     all.


!A typical trip!

  Let's try an example trip, from Petromir (82 Eridani II) to
  Terraster (Delta Pavonis III), a distance of 19 light-years (LY).
  Our ship for this exercise is a Corco /Mu/, one of the bigger
  commercial ships.

  From Petromir to the 82 Eridani jump point is 87.5 AU (90 AU for a
  G-class star minus 2.5 AU for Petromir's orbit).  The /Mu/ has a
  hefty burn rate of 16, so covering 87.5 AU at 1 G takes 432 energy
  units.

  The jump takes no additional energy.  (This becomes important
  below.)

  Finally, traversing the distance from the Delta Pavonis jump point
  to Terraster is a journey of 88.5 AU (Delta Pavonis is alco class G,
  but Terraster orbits only 1.5 AU from it).  The difference in
  distance turns out to be negligible, and we expend another 432
  units.  Our total energy for this voyage is therefore 864 units.

  The /Mu/ can hold 176 units in its hull, so we need to have
  sufficient space for another 688 units.  Energy pods hold 144 units
  each, so that's another five pods (rounding up).  /Mu/-class hulls
  aren't streamlined, so we can cram two energy pods into the space
  normally needed for one.  So we only need three pod "berths" (again,
  rounding up) for our five pods.  The /Mu/ can hold 12 pods total, so
  we have nine berths to fill up with our chosen combination of pods.

  For purposes of this example, we're only interested in three kinds
  of pods: standard cargo, standard passenger, and luxury passenger.
  (Petromir to Terraster is a green route, so we can take on luxury
  passengers.)  We'll look at four different scenarios:

  1. All cargo.  Nine cargo pods and no passengers (apart from those
     that can fit in the hull).

  2. Standard passenger.  Nine standard passenger pods.

  3. Uprated passenger.  Three luxury and six standard passenger pods.

  4. Hybrid.  One luxury passenger pod, three standard passenger, five
     cargo.

  !!Revenue!!

    Standard fare is 20 milliTrans (mT) per AU plus 100 mT per LY, or
    5.5 T.  Luxury fare is 2 1/2 times that, or 13.75 T.  It's hard to
    say what we'd get for our cargo, because it varies so much.  But we
    can calculate how much it would have to be for us to break even.

  !!Expenses!!

    We already know we need 864 units of energy (cost: 259.2 T).
    Leaving aside salaries, supplies and other (relatively) minor
    costs, there's one big cost: the ship itself.

    A Corco /Mu/ costs 14,500 T, and that's without pods.  Luxury
    cabin pods are 1,500 T each, standard cabin 1,200 T, and cargo
    pods a measly 35 T.  The total price varies from 15,515 T (option
    1) to 26,900 T (option 3).  It's unlikely most people would be
    able to pay this out of pocket, so they'll probably get a loan
    from a bank.

    For our discussion we'll assume 10% down and an 8% APR compounded
    monthly.


  !!All cargo!!

    A Corco /Mu/ with nine cargo pods can hold 315 tons of cargo in
    its pods and an additional 15 in the hull, for a total of 330
    tons.  The ship costs 15,515 T; monthly payments on our loan are
    about 168 T.  Our trip from Petromir to Terraster takes about 1.75
    months, so prorating the payment and adding it to the fuel cost
    gives us a total cost for the voyage of about 553 T.  Dividing the
    numbers, we need to make at least 1.68 T per ton to break even.

    Not too bad.  We could even turn a profit like that on some of the
    raw materials, like titanium or crude oil (carbon-based organic
    chemicals).  It'd be a snap if we're shipping manufactured goods.
    (Assuming we can fill the hull, of course.)  And we can still
    carry 25 passengers in the hull (standard fare only).

  !!All passenger!!

    Standard passenger pods hold 30 passengers; nine of these plus 30
    in the hull is a total of 300 passengers.  But wait!  The ship
    needs five crew members, and each passenger pod another three.
    That's a total of 32 crew, so we really only have room for 268
    paying passengers.  Also, the ship now costs 26,000 T, for a
    per-trip prorated payment of 493 T.

    Still, at 5.5 T per passenger, that's 1,474 T revenue, 921 T above
    expenses.  Much better than cargo; we can travel just over half
    full and still break even.

  !!Uprated passenger!!

    Replacing three of the standard cabin pods with luxury cabin pods
    costs us 51 passengers (luxury cabin pods only hold 15 and require
    a crew of 5), but each one is paying two and a half times standard
    fare.  The ship now costs 26,900 T and payment is 510 T, but our
    revenue goes up to about 1,565 T.  If we fill every luxury cabin
    we only need 28 standard-fare passengers to break even.  Of
    course, we also now have to pay salary for 38 crew (or split
    profits 38 ways), not 32, because luxury cabin pods require five
    crew each.  (Maybe the additional two are in charge of pillow
    mints.)

  !!Hybrid!!

    A compromise: five cargo pods, three standard cabin, one luxury
    cabin for the filthy rich.  The ship only costs 20,475 T, for a
    trip payment of 388 T on revenue of 762 T.  Even without cargo, we
    can make a (small) profit, provided we find 101 people willing to
    pay 5.5 T each and another 15 willing to pay 13.75 T per head.

!Passengers versus cargo!

  You may have noticed something in the discussions above.  If our
  trip had been five LY instead of 19, the cargo wouldn't care, but
  passengers would only be paying 1.4 T less per head.  We've seen how
  passengers are more profitable than cargo; for sufficiently short
  voyages, this may not be true (or will at least be less true).

!Small ships!

  The above example is for a large ship.  If we substitute a 
  Another example: Corco Gamma

    3 pods, streamlined; if accelerating at 1 G, need all three for
      fuel -- can't break even, even on cargo
    Coasting -- can't take on normal passengers, certainly not
      luxury.  Even coasting, cargo has to sell for 5.75 T/ton just to
      break even.
